tools/ats-shadow/README.adoc, before:

= ATS Shadow Verifier (Non-authoritative)
:status: draft
:audience: maintainers, CI

== Purpose

This tool provides non-authoritative checks over canonical manifest bytes produced by the SPARK core.

It MUST NOT be required for runtime correctness.
It MAY be used in CI to detect drift or implementation bugs.

== What it checks (default)

* LF-only line endings (no CR)
* file ends with exactly one LF
* no TAB characters
* no trailing whitespace at end of lines
* best-effort key ordering at the same indentation level for lines that look like `key: ...`

== Optional checks

* Digest coupling: compares sha256 of canonical bytes to digest found in summary.json
  Requires `sha256sum` on PATH.

* Idempotence: runs an external canonicalizer and compares bytes.
  Requires a command like: `ct canonicalize <file>`.

== Usage

Build (example using ats2-postiats):

  patscc -O2 -DATS_MEMALLOC_LIBC -o ct-shadow main.dats

Run:

  ./ct-shadow canonical.ctp

With digest check:

  ./ct-shadow --summary summary.json --check-digest canonical.ctp

With idempotence check:

  ./ct-shadow --canon-cmd "ct canonicalize" --check-idempotence canonical.ctp

Exit code:
* 0 pass
* 1 fail

== Design Rationale

This verifier is intentionally:

* **Non-authoritative**: The SPARK core is the source of truth. This tool detects drift.
* **Minimal**: ~300 lines of ATS2, no external dependencies except libc.
* **Safe to remove**: If ATS2 tooling becomes unavailable, delete this directory.

The language choice (ATS2) provides:

* Dependent types for array bounds checking
* Linear types for resource safety
* Different implementation = different bugs (diversity)

== CI Integration

[source,yaml]
----
shadow-verify:
  stage: test
  script:
    - patscc -O2 -DATS_MEMALLOC_LIBC -o ct-shadow tools/ats-shadow/main.dats
    - ./ct-shadow --summary dist/summary.json --check-digest dist/canonical.ctp
    - ./ct-shadow --canon-cmd "cerro canonicalize" --check-idempotence dist/canonical.ctp
  allow_failure: true  # Non-authoritative
----

== Maintenance

If key ordering rules change, update `is_key_char` and `parse_key_colon` functions.
If summary.json schema changes, update `extract_json_string_field` calls.

Commit message:

feat: Add canonical ct-minbase.ctp and summary.json schema
New files:
- manifests/examples/ct-minbase.ctp: Canonical example manifest
  - Multi-source container image (bash, coreutils, ca-certificates)
  - Debian snapshot pinning for reproducibility
  - Declarative build plan with fixed vocabulary
  - Policy section for provenance requirements

- spec/summary-schema.json: JSON Schema for build summary
  - Hash-stable post-parse artifact for signing
  - Links manifest to outputs with cryptographic hashes
  - Algorithm-agile signature format

- spec/build-summary.md: Documentation for summary format
  - Explains relationship between .ctp and summary.json
  - Documents invariants and verification

- manifests/examples/ct-minbase.summary.json: Example summary

Updated:
- spec/manifest-format.md: Added extended sections
  - [upstream] for multi-source manifests
  - [[inputs.sources]] for multiple sources
  - [[build.plan]] for declarative build steps
  - [policy] for provenance requirements
  - Bumped to 0.1.1-draft

- tools/ats-shadow/README.adoc: Added schema reference

tools/ats-shadow/README.adoc, after:

= ATS Shadow Verifier (Non-authoritative)
:status: draft
:audience: maintainers, CI

== Purpose

This tool provides non-authoritative checks over canonical manifest bytes produced by the SPARK core.

It MUST NOT be required for runtime correctness.
It MAY be used in CI to detect drift or implementation bugs.

== What it checks (default)

* LF-only line endings (no CR)
* file ends with exactly one LF
* no TAB characters
* no trailing whitespace at end of lines
* best-effort key ordering at the same indentation level for lines that look like `key: ...`

== Optional checks

* Digest coupling: compares sha256 of canonical bytes to digest found in summary.json
  Requires `sha256sum` on PATH.

* Idempotence: runs an external canonicalizer and compares bytes.
  Requires a command like: `ct canonicalize <file>`.

== Usage

Build (example using ats2-postiats):

  patscc -O2 -DATS_MEMALLOC_LIBC -o ct-shadow main.dats

Run:

  ./ct-shadow canonical.ctp

With digest check:

  ./ct-shadow --summary summary.json --check-digest canonical.ctp

With idempotence check:

  ./ct-shadow --canon-cmd "ct canonicalize" --check-idempotence canonical.ctp

Exit code:
* 0 pass
* 1 fail

== Design Rationale

This verifier is intentionally:

* **Non-authoritative**: The SPARK core is the source of truth. This tool detects drift.
* **Minimal**: ~300 lines of ATS2, no external dependencies except libc.
* **Safe to remove**: If ATS2 tooling becomes unavailable, delete this directory.

The language choice (ATS2) provides:

* Dependent types for array bounds checking
* Linear types for resource safety
* Different implementation = different bugs (diversity)

== CI Integration

[source,yaml]
----
shadow-verify:
  stage: test
  script:
    - patscc -O2 -DATS_MEMALLOC_LIBC -o ct-shadow tools/ats-shadow/main.dats
    - ./ct-shadow --summary dist/summary.json --check-digest dist/canonical.ctp
    - ./ct-shadow --canon-cmd "cerro canonicalize" --check-idempotence dist/canonical.ctp
  allow_failure: true  # Non-authoritative
----

== Summary.json Schema

The `summary.json` format is defined in `spec/summary-schema.json` (JSON Schema draft 2020-12).

Key fields used by this tool:

* `manifest.canonical_bytes_sha256` — SHA-256 of canonicalized .ctp bytes (for `--check-digest`)

See `manifests/examples/ct-minbase.summary.json` for a complete example.

== Maintenance

If key ordering rules change, update `is_key_char` and `parse_key_colon` functions.
If summary.json schema changes, update `extract_json_string_field` calls.
